Hello friends
In this video let us learn how selection sort algorithm
works in step by step
In the previous video we have learned how selection sort
works and designed an algorithm for it
So as we know the selection sort algorithm will find
the minimum or maximum element in each iteration and places
it in the correct position
So in this video let us learn how selection
sort algorithm works in step by step So we have
the function selection sort which takes the array to be
sorted and its size as input parameters
So we have an array of size five with elements
180 165 150 170 and 145
We are going to sort this array and here we
Will use nested for loop
where the inner for loop will find the minimum element
in the array and places it in the right position and
the outer loop will execute the inner loop
size minus one times So let us
See how it works
First we're declaring i and j and in first iteration of
outer loop i is equal to zero and inside we have
the inner for loop and here in first iteration J
equal to I place one that is zero plus one
which is equal to one
And now we have
If arr of I greater than arr of J that
is we are checking if element at
Index I is greater than element at Index J and
we have 180 greater than 165
That is the element at Index
I is not the minimum
So we need to swap these elements
That is we're finding the minimum element from this array
and bringing it to the index I in every iteration
So 180 165 are swap now in the next
iteration J is equal to two
And we have if arr of I greater than arr
of J that is if 165 greater than 150
150 and it is so swap them now in the next
iteration
j is equal to three
And we have if arr of I greater than arr
of J that is if 150 greater than
But it is not so
If fails that is still the element at index
I is minimum so we don't need to swap now
In the next iteration j is equal to four and we
have
If arr of I greater than arr of J that
is if 150 is greater than 145 and
it is so swap them
So 150 145 are now swap
Now in the next iteration j is equal to five
But now the condition j less than size fails
So control comes out of the inner for loop and
the first iteration of outer loop is now completed
Now the minimum element of this array is brought to the
first position
That is it's right position
That is it is sorted now So from now we
don't need to consider
But we will repeat the process for the remaining elements
That is after first iteration the element at first index
is sorted and that is why we have the initial
-isation J equal to I place one in every iteration
the elements
Still I will be sorted now In the second iteration
I equal to one and inside we have the inner
loop and J
equal to I plus one that is one plus one
which is equal to two and we have if arr of i
greater than arr of J that is if 180
greater than 165
And it is so swap them now in the next
iteration j is equal to three
And we have If arr of I greater than arr
of J that is if 165 is greater than
But it is not
That is element at index
I still the minimum value so we don't need to
swap
And remember we are not considering the index zero now
It is already sorted
It is the sorted part of the array We are dealing
with the Unsorted part only
So now in the next iteration j is equal to four
And we have if arr of I greater than arr
of J that is if 165 is greater than
150 and it is that is we have found an
element which is smaller than the Element at Index I
So swap them now in the next iteration j is equal
to five
But now the conditions j less than size fails so
control comes out of the inner for loop and second
iteration of Outer Loop is now completed
Now the minimum element of the unsorted part is found
and brought to its right position Now the elements at
index Zero and Index one are sorted that
is this is the sorted part and the remaining is the
unsorted part
Now in the next iteration of outer loop i Equal to
two
So in Inner loop first iteration j is equal to two
plus one that is three and we have if arr
of i greater than arr of J that is if 180
180 greater and 170 it is so swap them
180 170 are now swapped
Now in the next iteration j is equal to four
And we have if arr of I greater than arr
of J that is if 170 is greater than 165
165 and it is so we have found a much
smaller element so we have to swap them
So these are swapped and now in the next iteration
j is equal to five
But now the condition j less than size fails so control
comes out of the inner for loop and this iteration
of outer loop is also completed
Now the minimum element of unsorted part is found and brought
to its right position
Now the elements at Index zero index one and index
two are sorted
Now we have to sort the remaining part of the array
so in the next iteration i equal to a three and
in inner loop first iteration J equal to three plus
one that is four
And we have If arr of I greater than arr
of J that is if 180 is greater than
170 and it is so swap them
So 180 170 are now swapped
Now in the next iteration j equal to 5
But now the condition fails and control comes out of
the inner for loop
And this iteration of outer loop is also completed
Now in the next iteration i equal to four
But now the condition i less than size minus one fails
since size equal to five so size minus one equal to
four
And I is also equal to four
So the condition fails and control comes out of the
for loop
and we have only one element left now
and in each iteration what are we doing We are
taking the minimum element and placing it at its right
position
So if we have one element left at last it
must be the maximum element of the whole array and
it is at the right position
So the function is completely executed and we got the
array sorted
So this is how selection sort works
We have to find the minimum element in every iteration
and we are placing it at its right position .